---
title: "Democracy in Britain"
subtitle: ""
excerpt: "Democratization, elections, parties and voters "
date: 2025-01-01
author: "Christopher Prosser"
draft: false
tags:
categories:
layout: single
links:
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

This is a second-year undergraduate module that I co-convene with Nick
Allen. My half of the course focuses on elections in one way or another
-- from the expansion of the franchise and the development of the
British party system, to political participation and voting behaviour.

**Week 1: Democratisation and the expansion of the franchise**

This week will look at the chronology of what happened when with regard
to the democratization of Britain and evaluate competing theories that
try to explain why Britain democratized.

**Week 2: The origins and development of the British party system**

This week we look and the origins and development of the main political
factions in British politics before 1918 and why political parties in
their modern, institutionalized, form emerged in the second half of the
19th century. We also explore why Labour replaced the Liberals as one of
the major political parties in the early 20th century and think about
the importance of path dependency as it relates to the British party
system.

**Week 3: The Modern Party System(s)**

This week we look at the development of the British Party system since
1918. We look at the way party system fragmentation is measured and
evaluate the consequences of party system fragmentation for British
democracy. We also look at different ways of measuring programmatic
competition and the ways in which programmatic competition between the
Conservatives and Labour has evolved over time.

**Week 4: Political participation**

This week we look at the overall pattern of turnout at general elections
since 1918 and how it compares to other types of elections We explore
the role that political knowledge, norms, and efficacy all play in
making some people more likely to turn out to vote than others and look
how they helps explain why young adults are less likely to vote than
older people.

**Week 5: Parties and their members**

This week we explore the 'three faces of party organisation' and the
different ways in which these faces interact, in particular looking at
the role that members play in different political parties. We discuss
May's 'Law of Curvilinear Disparity' and examine demographic and
attitudinal differences between party members and party supporters, and
think about the implications of these differences for British democracy.

**Week 6: The Mechanics of Democracy: Electoral Systems**

This week we look at the mechanics of the different types of electoral
systems we use in the UK. We explore the impact that different electoral
systems have on party competition and evaluate how well the First Past
the Post electoral system works for Westminster elections and discuss
the prospects for electoral reform.

**Week 7: Class and voting**

This week we explore why people that share demographic characteristics
might vote in similar ways, using the example of social class. We look
at the way the relationship between class and vote choice in Britain has
evolved over time and evaluate the role of social change and party
strategy in driving those changes.

**Week 8: Electoral shocks**

This week we look at the rise of voter volaility and the role that
electoral shocks have played in driving vote choice in recent elections,
drawing on my book of the same name.

**Week 9: The News Media and Democracy**

This week we look at the role of the media in political attitudes and
votnig behaviour. We discuss the competing 'media malaise' and 'minimal
effects' paradigms, why selection bias makes studying media effects
particularly difficult and assess the evidence for whether the media
really matters.

**Week 10: Why people hate politics**

We conclude the course by looking at trends in democratic satisfaction
in Britain over the past few decades and using what we've learned to
evaluate evidence for what has driven democratic dissatisfaction in
Britain.
